I want us to start by thinking about
this device the phone that's very likely
in your pockets right now over 40% of
Americans check their phone within five
minutes of waking up every morning and
then they look at it another 50 times
during the day grown-ups consider this
device to be a necessity but now I want
you to imagine it in the hands of a
three-year-old and as a society we get
anxious parents are very worried that
this device is going to stunt their
children's social growth that it's going
to keep them from getting up and moving
that somehow this is going to disrupt
childhood so I want to challenge this
attitude I can envision a future where
we would be excited to see a preschooler
interacting with the screen these
screens can get KITT can get kids up and
moving even more they had the power to
tell us more about what a child is
learning then a standardized test can
and here's the really crazy thought I
believe that these screens have the
power to prompt more real-life
conversations between kids and their
parents now I was perhaps an unlikely
champion for this cause I studied
children's literature because I was
going to work with kids and books but
about 20 years ago I had an experience
that shifted my focus
I was helping lead a research study
about preschoolers and websites and I
walked in and I was assigned a three
year old named Maria and Maria had
actually never seen a computer before so
the first thing I had to do was teach
her how to use the mouse and when I
opened up the screen she moved it across
this she moved it across the screen and
she stopped on a character named X BL
and when she did that
the owl lifted his wing and waved at her
and Maria dropped the mouse pushed back
from the table leaped up and started
waving frantically back at him her
connection to that character was
visceral this wasn't a passive screen
experience this was a human experience
and it was exactly appropriate for a
three-year-old so I've now worked at PBS
KIDS for more than 15 years and my work
there is focused on harnessing the power
of technology as a positive in
children's lives I believe that as a
society we're missing a big opportunity
we're letting our fear and our
skepticism about these devices hold us
back from realizing their potential in
our children's lives and fear about kids
and technology is nothing new we've been
here before over 50 years ago the debate
was raging about the newly dominant
media the television that boxed in the
living room it might be separating kids
from one another it might keep them away
from the outside world but this is the
moment when Fred Rogers the long-running
host of Mister Rogers neighborhood
challenged society to look at television
as a tool a tool that could promote
emotional growth here's what he did he
looked out from the screen and he held a
conversation as if he were speaking to
each child individually about feelings
and then he would pause and let them
think about them you can see his
influence across the media landscape
today but at the time this was
revolutionary he shifted the way we were
looking at television in the lives of
children so today it's not just one box
kids are surrounded by devices and I'm
also a parent I understand this feeling
of anxiety but I want us to look at
three common fears that parents have and
see if we can shift our focus to the
opportunity that's in each of them
so fear number one screens are passive
this is going to keep our kids from
getting up and moving Chris Kratt and
Martin Kratts are zoologists brothers
who host a show about animals called
Wild Kratts and they approached the PBS
team to say can we do something with
those cameras that are built into every
device now could those cameras capture a
very natural kid play pattern pretending
to be animals so we started with bats
and when kids came in to play this game
they loved seeing themselves on screen
with wings but my favorite part of this
when the game was over and we turned off
the screams the kids kept being bats
they kept flying around the room they
kept veering left and right to catch
mosquitos and they remembered things
they remembered that bats fly at night
and they remembered that when bats sleep
they hang upside down and fold their
wings in this game definitely got kids
up and moving but also now when kids go
outside did they look at a bird and
think how does a bird fly differently
than I flew when I was a bat the digital
technology prompted embodied learning
the kids can now take out into the world
so fear in number two playing games on
these screens is just a waste of time
it's going to distract children from
their education game developers know
that you can learn a lot about a
player's skill by looking at the backend
data where did a player pause where did
they make a few mistakes before they
found the right answer and my team
wanted to take this tool set and apply
it to academic learning our producer in
Boston WGBH created a series of Curious
George games focused on math and
researchers came in and had 80
preschoolers play these games they then
gave all 80 of those preschoolers a
standardized math
we could see early on that these games
were actually helping kids understand
some key skills but our partners at UCLA
wanted us to dig deeper they focus on
data analysis and Student Assessment and
they wanted to take that back-end
gameplay data and see if they could use
it to predict a child's math score so
they they made a neural net they
essentially trained the computer to use
this data and here are the results this
is a subset of the children's
standardized math scores and this is the
computers prediction of each child's
score based on playing some Curious
George games the prediction is
astonishingly accurate especially
considering the fact that these games
weren't built for assessment the team
that did the study believes that games
like these can teach us more about a
child's cognitive learning than a
standardized test can what if games
could reduce testing time in the
classroom what if they could reduce
testing anxiety how could they give
teachers snapshots of insight to help
them better focus their individualized
learning
so the third fear I want to address is
the one that I think is often the
biggest and that's this these screens
are isolating me from my child so let's
lay out a scenario let's say that you
are a parent and you need 25 minutes of
uninterrupted time to get dinner ready
in order to do that you hand a tablet to
your three-year-old now this is a moment
where you probably feel very guilty
about what you just did but now imagine
this 20 minutes later you receive a text
message on that cell phone that's always
within arm's reach and it says Alex just
matched five rhyming words ask him to
play this game with you can you think of
a word that rhymes with cat or how about
ball
in our studies when parents received
simple tips like these they felt
empowered they were so excited to play
these games at the dinner table with
their kids and the kids loved it too not
only did it feel like magic that their
parents knew what they'd been playing
kids love to play games with their
parents just the act of talking to kids
about their media can be incredibly
powerful last summer
Texas Tech University published a study
that the show Daniel Tiger's
neighborhood could promote empathy the
development of empathy among children
but there was a really important patch
to this study the greatest benefit was
only when parents talked to kids about
what they watched neither just watching
nor just talking about it was enough it
was the combination that was key so when
I read the study I started thinking
about how rarely parents of Preschoolers
actually talked to kids about the
content of what they're playing and what
they're watching and so I decided to try
it with my four-year-old I said were you
playing a car game earlier today and
Benjamin perked up and said yes and did
you see that I made my car out of a
pickle it was really hard to open the
trunk this hilarious conversation about
what was fun in the game and what could
have been better
continued all the way to school that
morning I'm not here to suggest to you
that all digital media is great for kids
there are legitimate reasons for us to
be concerned about the current state of
children's content on these screens and
it's right for us to be thinking about
balance
where do screens fit against all the
other things that a child needs to do to
learn and to grow but when we fixate on
our fears about it we forget a really
major point and that is the kids are
living in the same world we live in the
world where the grown-ups check their
phones more than 50 times a day
screens are a part of children's lives
and if we forget if we pretend that they
aren't or if we get overwhelmed by our
fear kids are never going to learn how
and why to use them what if we start
raising our expectations for this media
what if we start talking to kids
regularly about the content on these
screens what if we start looking for the
positive impacts that this technology
can have in our children's lives that's
when the potential of these tools can
become a reality thank you
[Applause]